Silurian Period
	Silurian Period, in geologic time, the third period of the Paleozoic Era. It began 443.8 million years ago and ended 419.2 million years ago, extending from the close of the Ordovician Period to the beginning of the Devonian Period.
	During the Silurian, continental elevations were generally much lower than in the present day, and global sea level was much higher. Sea level rose dramatically as the extensive glaciers from the Late Ordovician ice age melted. This rising prompted changes in climatic conditions that allowed many faunal groups to recover from the extinctions of Late Ordovician times. Large expanses of several continents became flooded with shallow seas, and mound-type coral reefs were very common. Fishes were widespread. Vascular plants began to colonize coastal lowlands during the Silurian Period, whereas continental interiors remained essentially barren of life.
	The name of this period is derived from work done by Scottish geologist Roderick I. Murchison, who in 1835 named a sequence of rocks in Wales and its borderland with England in honour of a native people called the Silures. The Silures, under the leadership of Caratacus, resisted Roman conquest for 30 years until 78 CE, when they were finally overcome.

Paleogeography
	During most of the Silurian Period, the vast Panthalassic Ocean covered the northern polar regions, the supercontinent of Gondwana stretched over the southern polar region, and a ring of at least six continents spanned the Equator and middle latitudes. The approximate orientations and locations of Silurian continents can be reconstructed using a combination of paleomagnetic, paleoclimatic, and biogeographic data. The Earth’s magnetic field leaves its signature on volcanic rocks and certain sedimentary rocks rich in such iron-bearing minerals as magnetite. As rocks capable of being magnetized are cooled or otherwise lithified, their component crystals (grains) are lined up with the Earth’s magnetic field. Unless the rocks are remelted by the heat from the planet’s interior or reworked by erosion, they retain this signature regardless of whether they change position or not. The Earth’s zonal climate also has an effect on global patterns of sedimentation.
	The most unusual features of the Silurian that distinguish it from the present-day physical environment relate to conditions of low continental elevations combined with a much higher global stand in sea level. Extensive continental regions were flooded by shallow seas ranging in water depth from a few to little more than 100 metres (330 feet). Where these seas occupied a tropical to subtropical climatic zone, coral mound reefs with associated carbonate sediments were very common. Strata forming in arid regions differ from those formed in inundated areas or other regions with high annual rainfall. The deposition of evaporites (salts) was periodically set in motion as a result of reduced ocean circulation occurring in geographically restricted places such as shallow embayments.
	The strong faunal endemism (the restriction or limiting of species to specific continents or isolated regions) present during the Ordovician Period was replaced during the Silurian Period by a situation where some species were distributed globally. Seafloor topography was muted over large areas of flooded continental platforms, and faunas of shelly invertebrates in different regions were remarkably consistent with one another. This has allowed geologists and stratigraphers to correlate layers of Silurian rock found on different present-day continents.
	The geographic summary that follows is based on a global reconstruction specific to the Wenlock Epoch which spans the middle of the Silurian Period.

1 - Laurentia
	Much of North America (including Greenland), northwestern Ireland, Scotland, and the Chukotskiy Peninsula of northeastern Russia belonged to the paleocontinent Laurentia (a name derived from Quebec’s portion of the Canadian Shield). With respect to the present-day Great Lakes and Hudson Bay, Laurentia was rotated clockwise during Wenlock time to fit fully between the latitudes 30° N and 30° S of the paleoequator. The present south shore of Hudson Bay was at the centre of Laurentia, with the Wenlock paleoequator crossing near Southampton Island. The microcontinent of Barentsia, which included Norway’s island of Svalbard, was likely appended to Laurentia off eastern Greenland. Island arcs and highland areas, such as Taconica (a landmass that would become part of eastern North America) and Pearya (a landmass that would become the northern part of Ellesmere Island), rimmed the flooded continent. During the Llandovery and Wenlock epochs, more than 65 percent of Laurentia was flooded by shallow seas.

2 - Baltica
	The narrow, north-south Iapetus Ocean still separated Laurentia from another paleocontinent, Baltica, during Wenlock time. The Uralian and Variscan-Hercynian sutures—regions where earlier orogenies (mountain-building events) had welded landmasses together—marked the eastern and southern margins of this paleocontinent. The northern tip of Scandinavia was situated just below the paleoequator during the Wenlock Epoch, but the islands of Novaya Zemlya extended well to the north. The most prominent features were the Caledonian highlands of Norway, although a lowland attributed to the Fennoscandian Shield (rocks of Precambrian origin underlying the present-day Baltic Sea, the Kola Peninsula of Russia, and the countries of Norway, Sweden, and Finland) existed in the vicinity of Finland. Another lowland within Baltica is related to the Sarmatian Shield, in the region between the Vistula and Volga rivers in Poland and adjacent Russia. The microcontinent of Avalonia—its name derived from the Avalon Peninsula of eastern Newfoundland—was appended to Baltica by the end of Ordovician time. It included what are now England, Wales, southeastern Ireland, the Belgian Ardennes, northern France, eastern Newfoundland, part of Nova Scotia, southern New Brunswick, and coastal New England.

3 - Siberia
	Separated from Baltica by the Pleionic Ocean (essentially the northwestern arm of the Paleotethys Sea), the paleocontinent of Siberia assumed an orientation rotated 180° from its present alignment (as recognized by the inverted position of Lake Baikal). A huge Siberian platform sea extended southward. Similarly, Kazakhstania was a neighbouring continent to the east in the same northern middle latitudes. North China (including Manchuria and Korea) and South China (the Yangtze platform) were two separate continents situated in a more equatorial position. In contrast to Siberia and Kazakhstania, most of North and South China were elevated above sea level during Wenlock time.

4 - Gondwana
	The vast supercontinent of Gondwana was centred over the South Pole. In addition to Australia, Antarctica, India, Arabia, Africa, and South America, Silurian Gondwana also included smaller pieces of Florida, southern Europe, and the Cimmerian terranes—namely, Turkey, Iran, Afghanistan, Tibet, and the Malay Peninsula—on its outer fringes. Either present-day Brazil or contiguous West Africa was stationed directly over the South Pole, buried by an ice cap likely comparable in size to the one capping Antarctica today. During Wenlock time, India, Tibet, the Malay Peninsula, and Australia projected into subtropical or tropical latitudes. The east-west ocean separating the southern European sector of Gondwana from northern Europe (Baltica) is called the Rheic Ocean and was essentially a southwestern extension of the Paleotethys Sea. The flooded margin of eastern Australia had a more-varied seafloor topography than the other shallow seas because of the extensive volcanism occurring there during Silurian time, but it shared many of the same faunal elements because of its tropical latitude.

Paleoclimate
Atmospheric circulation
	Broad-scale Silurian climatic conditions can be inferred by determining the positions and orientations of the paleocontinents and assuming that atmospheric circulation functioned according to the same basic principles during Silurian times as it does today. The global paleoclimate was effectively driven by major contrast in the proportions of land and water between the Northern and Southern hemispheres. A zonally uniform climate would be expected in the Northern Hemisphere during the Silurian, because it was dominated by a North Polar ocean. Wind patterns must have included strong polar easterlies at high northern latitudes, prevailing westerlies at midlatitudes, and northeast trade winds in the tropics. In contrast, with Gondwana centred over the South Pole, climate in the Southern Hemisphere must have been dominated by the interaction of cellular air masses over land and water. The large continent would have experienced wide temperature variations due to summer heating and winter cooling.
	Atmospheric circulation patterns interpreted for an early Silurian summer in the Northern Hemisphere indicate high pressure over the polar ocean with a zone of low pressure around 60° N latitude. Distinct high-pressure cells formed above subtropical oceans, much like the persistent Bermuda high-pressure centre over the present subtropical North Atlantic. Another zone of low pressure formed above the thermal equator, or the region of most intense solar warming. This somewhat migratory zone was the Silurian intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ), where the convergence of Northern and Southern Hemispheric trade winds caused the warm tropical air to rise, which in turn produced regular cloud cover and precipitation.
	Mostly, the ITCZ remained near the Equator, but it may have migrated slightly to the north in response to strong summer heating on Laurentia, Baltica, and possibly Kazakhstania. This tendency would have been strongest along the eastern margins of tropical continents, where anticyclonic circulation around subtropical highs pulled warm, moisture-laden air northwestward from equatorial oceans. Subtropical high pressure probably spread onto Gondwana, particularly the Australian and Antarctic sectors. A pressure ridge may have merged with these subtropical highs to form a massive cold cell penetrating to higher latitudes over the continental interior of Gondwana. Low-pressure systems over Gondwana’s midlatitude shelf were not unlike the Aleutian and Icelandic lows of today.
	Pressure systems should have moved somewhat southward during the Northern Hemispheric winter—particularly the ITCZ, which generally follows the region of maximum heating to the Southern Hemisphere during this season. A low-pressure system between Laurentia and Baltica is consistent with the erosion of thick clastic rocks (sedimentary rock composed of fragments of older rocks) derived from the Taconic and Caledonian highlands. The most significant seasonal variation surely occurred in the eastern Australian and Antarctic sectors of Gondwana, where summer heating abolished winter high-pressure cells and pulled the ITCZ more poleward. This is comparable to today’s monsoons, which pull the ITCZ in the opposite direction over the subcontinent of India during the Northern Hemispheric summer. Subtropical highs intensified over the ocean waters of the Southern Hemisphere and probably insulated the arid climate of Western Australia.

Oceanic anoxia
	The broadly flooded shelf of Gondwana had a circumference of at least 28,000 km (17,400 miles), most of which sat in the belt of persistent westerly winds. This had the effect of producing intense surface upwelling of oceanic waters along the margins of the supercontinent and significantly boosting biological productivity. After the organisms living in these waters died, their remains sank into a bottom layer of water characterized by low levels of dissolved oxygen. This dearth of oxygen (anoxia) significantly decelerated the decomposition process, thereby providing the right conditions for the development of black shales. Today, black shale deposits are widespread around the perimeter areas of the former supercontinent, as evidenced by the rich source rocks yielding concentrations of Silurian oil in present-day Algeria and Saudi Arabia.


life
	Marine benthic (bottom-dwelling) invertebrates of the Silurian Period belonged to persistent assemblages, or communities, that commonly conformed to ecological zonation. One way in which zonation expresses itself is through bathymetric gradients (changes in light, temperature, salinity, and pressure with depth).Paleoecologists studying in Wales, Norway, Estonia, Siberia, South China, and North America have used very similar models to explain the geographic distribution of Silurian communities. Some of these communities were adapted to life under conditions of stronger sunlight and more vigorous wave energy in shallow nearshore waters; others were restricted to darker, quieter environments in deeper offshore waters.

Pentamerid communities
	The Pentamerus community was an early Silurian community dominated by the large-shelled brachiopod (lamp shell) of the species Pentamerus oblongus. The community often included 5 to 20 associated species, although enormous populations of only one species sometimes are found preserved in growth position. The Pentamerus community and its slightly older and younger equivalents dominated by similar pentamerid species in the genera Virgiana, Borealis, Pentameroides, and Kirkidium all occupied a bathymetric zone of medium water depth. These pentamerid communities are known to have lived in sunlit waters because they are associated with robust, calcareous green algae. The waters were not too shallow, however, because pentamerid brachiopods lost their pedicle (the fleshy appendage that tethers the shell to the seafloor) as they matured, and thus unsecured populations were vulnerable to disruption by steady wave activity. The pentamerid communities thrived within depths of perhaps 30 to 60 metres (100 to 200 feet). This was below the level of normal (fair weather) wave activity but still in reach of storm waves. At their lower depth limit, the pentamerid communities were out of reach of all but the most intense and infrequent storms.
	In regions such as Wales that are characterized by clastic rock deposition, an onshore-offshore array of five brachiopod-dominated communities may be mapped in belts running parallel to the ancient shoreline. Listed in order from shallowest to deepest position, they are the Lingula, Eocoelia, Pentamerus, Stricklandia, and Clorinda communities. Below a relatively steep gradient, the centre of the Welsh Basin was filled by graptolitic shales.
	Other areas, such as the Laurentian and Siberian platforms, characterized by carbonate deposition, typically developed a continuum of coral-stromatoporoid, Pentamerus, and Stricklandia communities. (Stromatoporoids are large colonial marine organisms similar to hydrozoans.) Clorinda communities were rare in this setting. Stricklandia communities sometimes included smaller, less-robust individuals of calcareous green algae, indicating a slightly deeper-water environment than that occupied by the Pentamerus community. Coral-stromatoporoid communities, which sometimes formed reef mounds, preferred wave-agitated waters shallower than 30 metres (100 feet). Much like the reef communities of today, they could not tolerate the more excessive rates of sedimentation typical of clastic settings. Bathymetric relief on carbonate platforms was very gentle; the full spectrum of available communities was likely often expressed over a gradient hundreds of kilometres long. In contrast, the bathymetric gradient on the Welsh shelf was no more than a few tens of kilometres long. Like the Pentamerus community, the other early Silurian communities have ecological equivalents that took their place in later Silurian time.

Reef mounds and coral biostromes
	Reef mounds (bioherms) provided the Silurian seafloor with an organically constructed microtopography featuring zonations of segregated brachiopods, gastropods (class of mollusk containing present-day snails and slugs), crinoids (class of echinoderm containing present-day sea lilies and feather stars), and trilobites. The Thornton Reef Complex outside Chicago is an example of a well-zoned Wenlock complex more than 1 km (0.6 mile) in diameter. Others are well known from the Silurian of Manitoulin Island (Ontario, Can.), northern Greenland, Shropshire (Eng.), Gotland (Swed.), Estonia, the central and southern Urals of Russia, and Siberia. The most spectacular complex is a barrier reef 350 km (215 miles) long of late Llandovery–early Wenlock age in northern Greenland.
	Reefs of all Silurian ages are known, but their development probably reached a climax during Wenlock time. Several thousand bioherms have been recognized from outcrop and subsurface evidence across a tract of 800,000 square km (309,000 square miles) surrounding the Great Lakes region of North America. Quite distinct from the Silurian reef mounds are concentrations of tabulate corals and lamellar stromatoporoids that lived in shallow water on a level seafloor. The resulting accumulations are flat-layered (biostromal) in design. The tabulate corals are often dominated by species belonging to the genera Favosites (honeycomb corals) and Halysites (chain corals) and by tabulate corals of the genera Syringopora and Heliolites. The associated stromatoporoids are essentially armoured sponges, the lamellar construction of which commonly lends them a pancake shape.
	The creation of global biozones of different organisms is also evident in Silurian sedimentary deposits. The rich benthic faunas just described were tropical to subtropical in distribution. The southern temperate zone, sometimes called the Malvinokaffric Realm, is represented by the low-diversity Clarkeia (brachiopod) fauna from Gondwanan Africa and South America. A northern temperate zone is represented by the low-diversity Tuvaella (brachiopod) fauna mostly restricted to Mongolia and adjacent parts of Siberia. The Tuvaella fauna also has been discovered in northwestern China, which apparently represents a more southern extension, since it straddled the paleoequator during the Silurian Period.

Fishes
	Fishes representative of all Silurian ages were widely distributed in marine environments (carbonate and clastic) in a broad belt within the latitudes 40° N and 40° S of the paleoequator. They are known from fossils of individual scales as well as from rare body molds. A wide variety of agnatha (jawless) fishes are represented by species belonging to the orders Thelodonti, Heterostraci, Osteostraci, and Anaspida. Fishes with a primitive jaw apparatus are represented by members of the subclasses Acanthodii, Elasmobranchii, and Actinopterygii. Different endemic groups developed in Laurentia (known widely from sites in the Canadian Arctic, the Yukon, Pennsylvania, New York, and especially Scotland), Baltica (especially Norway and Estonia), and Siberia (including adjacent Mongolia).

Terrestrial fungi
	The first fully terrestrial organisms preserved in the fossil record were fungi. The oldest, Tortotubus protuberans, which was discovered in early Silurian-age rocks of New York state, Scotland, and Gotland in Sweden, likely fed on detritus. Silurian-age decomposers, such as fungi and bacteria, are thought to have helped to stock the soil with nutrients capable of supporting terrestrial plant life.

Vascular land plants
	Land colonization by vascular plants was under way during most of the Silurian Period, although activity clearly was restricted to coastal lowlands—the remainder of the land being essentially barren. These plants were small (about 6 cm, or 2.4 inches, in height), with smooth, simply branched stems bearing spore sacs at their tips. Photosynthesis took place entirely within the leafless stems. Plant megafossils preserved as coalified impressions are fragmentary. Their known distribution includes most of the Silurian continents with limited representation on Laurentia (New York and northern Greenland), Baltica (Avalonian Wales and England, as well as Podolia in what is now southwestern Ukraine), the Siberian corner of Sinkiang (northwestern China), and some Australian and North African sectors of Gondwana (Victoria and Libya, respectively). Latitudinal distribution apparently ranged from about 45° N (Siberia) to 30° S (Libya). Species belonging to the genus Cooksonia were among the first and most successful vascular land plants found in all the above-cited areas except for northern Greenland and Australia. A distinctly endemic group is represented by the genus Baragwanathia during Ludlow times in Victoria, Austl.


Extinctions
	During the Silurian, several small extinction and radiation events in the evolution of nektonic (free-swimming) and pelagic (free-floating) organisms appear to be linked to fluctuations in sea level. Ten individual extinction events for graptolites alone are recorded in the rock layers of the Silurian Period, during which time 52 to 79 percent of these planktonic animals disappeared. Most of these events correspond to drops in sea level. Among conodonts (toothlike remains of primitive chordates), a significant radiation was indicated by species within the Pterospathodus amorphognathoides biozone, which straddles the Llandovery-Wenlock boundary and includes the late Telychian Age (Llandovery Epoch) highstand. Extinction of key species followed by the emergence of several new species during early Sheinwoodian time (Wenlock Epoch) was one of the most drastic changes in Silurian conodont succession.
	Acritarchs are a catchall group of various small microfossils that may represent the pelagically dispersed spore cases of benthic algae. Four major turnovers in Silurian acritarch species are recognized. Among those coinciding with highstands in sea level, the turnovers of the mid-Aeronian Age (Llandovery Epoch) and early Gorstian Age (Ludlow Epoch) are the most extensive. The various nektonic and pelagic organisms may have been affected by changes in water temperature related to minor episodes of glaciation.


geology
Distinctive features
	Silurian formations widely scattered around the world display a wealth of natural beauty. Niagara Falls and the 11-km (7-mile) Niagara Gorge on the Canadian-U.S. border are products of erosion that continue to be sculpted by rushing waters undercutting the soft shale beneath a ledge of more-resistant Silurian dolomite.
	The Niagara Escarpment is a curved ridge of resistant Silurian dolomite stretching more than 1,000 km (about 600 miles) from Niagara Falls through Michigan’s Upper Peninsula to Wisconsin’s Door Peninsula and beyond. This resistant feature stands as much as 125 metres (400 feet) above the Great Lakes, which were shaped by the excavation of soft shales during the glaciations of the Pleistocene Epoch. In Ontario the Niagara Escarpment fringes the eastern and northern sides of Lake Huron, and it is recognized by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as a biosphere reserve. A continuous footpath follows the Niagara Escarpment for 800 km (about 500 miles) from Queenston Heights, Ont., in the Niagara Falls area to the tip of the Bruce Peninsula at Tobermory, Ont.
	Other notable manifestations of Silurian rock include the rolling hills of eastern Iowa and central and southern Indiana, as well as similar rounded hills, called klintar, that dot the island landscape of Gotland, Swed., where Silurian mound reefs reach the surface. These ancient reef deposits have been eroded into remarkable shapes where they surface near the modern seacoast. The renowned naturalist Carolus Linnaeus sketched in his field notebook the bizarre shapes of “stone giants”—large limestone sea stacks, 8 to 10 metres (about 26 to 33 feet) high, which still stand in ranks along the shores of Gotland at Kyllej.
	Some of Norway’s beautiful inland fjords, such as Tyrifjorden, northwest of Oslo, are lined by Silurian shales and limestones. Long, graceful curves made by the Dniester River in Ukraine and the Moiero (Moyyero) River in Siberia cut through high bluffs of Silurian limestone and marl. Picturesque sea cliffs formed by Silurian clastic rocks guard the coasts of Ireland’s Dingle Peninsula. Australia’s Kalbarri National Park features gorges on the Murchison River, which winds to bold sea cliffs on the Indian Ocean, all set in Silurian Tumblagooda Sandstone. The partly Silurian Tabuk Formation forms vast desert stretches in Saudi Arabia. At an elevation of 6,000 metres (19,700 feet), the Spiti River valley in India’s Himalayan region is lined partly by limestone and quartzite belonging to the Muth Formation.

sea level
	Smaller fluctuations in sea level, between 30 and 50 metres (about 100 and 165 feet) in magnitude, continued to occur on a global basis throughout the Silurian. In contrast to the Late Ordovician event, these fluctuations did not strongly affect the shelly bottom-dwelling invertebrates perched on continental platforms. Benthic faunas adapted to their changing living conditions at particular bathymetric levels by simply shifting upslope or downslope. The amount of available habitat space was not drastically altered as a result of these sea level fluctuations.
	Data from three or more different paleocontinents indicate that at least four global highstands (intervals where sea level lies above the continental shelf edge) took place during Llandovery time. Sea level fluctuations are reconstructed by studying biological community replacement patterns through well-exposed stratigraphic sequences and then comparing the timing of trends on an interregional to intercontinental basis. These cycles of rising and falling sea levels had an average duration of about 2.5 million years during the Llandovery Epoch. The first event probably corresponds to the maximum rise in sea level achieved as the extensive Late Ordovician glaciers melted. This highstand occurred during the transition between the Rhuddanian and Aeronian Stages of Llandovery time. A second highstand is mid-Aeronian in age, the third early Telychian, and the fourth late Telychian.
	Present data are not as complete for the rest of the Silurian, but a highstand in sea level has been identified during the middle of the Wenlock Epoch. A mid-Ludlow lowstand in sea level separates an early Ludlow highstand from at least one subsequent Ludlow highstand. Information on sea level changes during the Pridoli Epoch is fragmentary and globally inconsistent.
	Late Silurian lowstands were sufficient to downgrade ocean circulation patterns and stimulate widespread evaporite deposition in Laurentia, Baltica, Siberia, and the Australian sector of Gondwana. Some of these bathymetric changes, which were brought about by submarine volcanism or by the tectonic elevation or subsidence of the seafloor, were clearly local, rather than global, in effect. Those sea level fluctuations recorded on different paleocontinents during the same interval of geologic time may have been coordinated by minor changes in the size of the surviving Gondwanan ice cap. South American tillites interpreted as Llandovery in age lend support to this model. Global drawdown in sea level is linked directly to evidence for the onset of at least three successive glacial episodes in the Brazilian sector of Gondwana, for example.