The Pre Cambrian Era
	The Precambrian is the first super eon of earth’s history. This division of time — about  seven-eights of Earth’s history. The Precambrian era is usually considered to have the eons : the Hadean, the Archean and the Proterozoic.

Hadean Eon 
	Occurred 4.6 billion to 4 billion years ago. It’s named for the mythological Hades for probable conditions of this time. During Hadean time, the solar system was forming within a cloud of dust and gas known as the solar nebula which eventually spawned asteroids, comets, moons and planets.
	4.52 billion years ago, Astrogeophysicicist theorize the proto-Earth collided with a Mars-size planetoid named “Theia”. The collision added about 10 percent to Earth’s mass and coalesced to form Earth’s moon.
	In the hypothesis, Theia’s iron core sank to the center of the still molten Earth, giving Earth’s core enough density to begin to cool. Lighter elements floating on the surface began to form a scum of crustal materials. This early crust was frequently turned and subsumed by the molten interior. Study of lunar formations shows that the Earth/moon system continued to be bombarded by frequent asteroid collisions throughout the Hadean eon.


Archean Eon 
	Between 4 billion and 2.5 billion years ago, Approximately 70 percent of continental landmass was formed during this time.  Small “island” land masses floated in the molten “seas”. Earth had acquired enough mass to hold a reducing atmosphere that composed of methane, ammonia and other gases. Water from comets and hydrated minerals condensed in the atmosphere and fell as torrential rain, cooling the planet and filling the first oceans with liquid water.
	Exactly when or how it happened is unknown, but microfossils of this time indicate that life began in oceans about 3.5 billion to 2.8 billion year ago during earth occur torrential rain. It’s probable that these microscopic prokaryotes began as chemoautotrophs, anaerobic bacteria able to obtain carbon from carbon dioxide (CO2). By the end of the Archean, the ocean floor was covered in a living mat of bacterial life.


Proterozoic Eon 
	The Proterozoic Eon is also called “age of hidden life”. About 2.5 billion years ago, enough shield rock had formed to start recognizable geologic processes su as plate tectonics. Earth’s progress from a molten hell to a living planet. It’s generally accepted that different types of prokaryotic organisms formed symbiotic relationships. Some types, more efficient at converting energy, were engulfed by larger protective “bubbles” able to shield them from the harsh environment that later we call it “cell membrane”.  As time also went on the symbiotic relationship became permanent and the “energy conversion” components became the “chloroplasts” and “mitochondria” of the first eukaryotic cells. Microfossils of these early cells are called Acritarchs.



	Precambrian, period of time extending from about 4.6 billion years ago (the point at which Earth began to form) to the beginning of the Cambrian Period, 541 million years ago. The Precambrian encompasses the Archean and Proterozoic eons, which are formal geologic intervals that lasted from 4 billion to about 541 million years ago, and the Hadean Eon, which is an informal interval spanning from 4.6 billion to 4 billion years ago. The Precambrian represents more than 80 percent of the total geologic record.
	All life-forms were long assumed to have originated in the Cambrian, and therefore all earlier rocks were grouped together into the Precambrian. Although many varied forms of life evolved and were preserved extensively as fossil remains in Cambrian sedimentary rocks, detailed mapping and examination of Precambrian rocks on most continents have revealed that additional primitive life-forms existed approximately 3.5 billion years ago. Nevertheless, the original terminology to distinguish Precambrian rocks from all younger rocks is still used for subdividing geologic time.
	The earliest evidence for the advent of life includes Precambrian microfossils that resemble algae, cysts of flagellates, tubes interpreted to be the remains of filamentous organisms, and stromatolites (sheetlike mats precipitated by communities of microorganisms). In the late Precambrian, the first multicellular organisms evolved, and sexual division developed. By the end of the Precambrian, conditions were set for the explosion of life that took place at the start of the Cambrian, the first period of the Phanerozoic Eon (541 million years ago to the present).

environment
	Several rock types yield information on the range of environments that may have existed during Precambrian time. Evolution of the atmosphere is recorded by banded-iron formations (BIFs), paleosols (buried soil horizons), and red beds, whereas tillites (sedimentary rocks formed by the lithification of glacial till) provide clues to the climatic patterns that occurred during Precambrian glaciations.

Paleogeography
	One of the most important factors controlling the nature of sediments deposited today is continental drift. The continents are distributed at different latitudes, and latitudinal position affects the temperature of oceanic waters along continental margins (the combined area of the continental shelf and continental slope); in short, sedimentary deposition is climatically sensitive. At present, most carbonates and oxidized red soils are deposited within 30 degrees of the Equator, phosphorites within 45 degrees, and evaporites within 50 degrees. Most fossil carbonates, evaporites, phosphorites, and red beds of Phanerozoic age dating back to the Cambrian have a similar bimodal distribution with respect to their paleoequators. If the uniformitarian principle that the present is the key to the past is valid (meaning the same geologic processes occurring today occurred in the past), then sediments laid down during the Precambrian would have likewise been controlled by the movement and geographic position of the continents. Thus, it can be inferred that the extensive evaporites dating to 3.5 billion years ago from the Pilbara region of Western Australia could not have been formed within or near the poles. It can also be inferred that stromatolite-bearing dolomites of Riphean rock, a sedimentary sequence spanning the period from 1.65 billion to 800 million years ago, were deposited in warm, tropical waters. Riphean rock is primarily located in the East European craton, which extends from Denmark to the Ural Mountains, and in the Siberian craton in Russia.
	Today, phosphate sediments are deposited primarily along the western side of continents. This is the result of high biological productivity in nearby surface waters due to the upwelling of nutrient-rich currents that are moving toward the Equator. The major phosphorite deposits of the Aravalli mountain belt of Rajasthan in northwestern India, which date from the Proterozoic Eon, are associated with stromatolite-rich dolomites. They were most likely deposited on the western side of a continental landmass that resided in the tropics.

Paleoclimate
Evolution of the atmosphere and ocean
	During the long course of Precambrian time, the climatic conditions of Earth changed considerably. Evidence of this can be seen in the sedimentary record, which documents appreciable changes in the composition of the atmosphere and oceans over time.

Oxygenation of the atmosphere
	Earth almost certainly possessed a reducing atmosphere before 2.5 billion years ago. The Sun’s radiation produced organic compounds from reducing gases—methane (CH4) and ammonia (NH3). The minerals uraninite (UO2) and pyrite (FeS2) are easily destroyed in an oxidizing atmosphere; confirmation of a reducing atmosphere is provided by unoxidized grains of these minerals in 3.0-billion-year-old sediments. However, the presence of many types of filamentous microfossils dated to 3.45 billion years ago in the cherts of the Pilbara region suggests that photosynthesis had begun to release oxygen into the atmosphere by that time. The presence of fossil molecules in the cell walls of 2.5-billion year-old blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) establishes the existence of rare oxygen-producing organisms by that period.
	Oceans of the Archean Eon (4.0 to 2.5 billion years ago) contained much volcanic-derived ferrous iron (Fe2+), which was deposited as hematite (Fe2O3) in BIFs. The oxygen that combined the ferrous iron was provided as a waste product of cyanobacterial metabolism. A major burst in the deposition of BIFs from 3.1 billion to 2.5 billion years ago—peaking about 2.7 billion years ago—cleared the oceans of ferrous iron. This enabled the atmospheric oxygen level to increase appreciably. By the time of the widespread appearance of eukaryotes at 1.8 billion years ago, oxygen concentration had risen to 10 percent of present atmospheric level (PAL). These relatively high concentrations were sufficient for oxidative weathering to take place, as evidenced by hematite-rich fossil soils (paleosols) and red beds (sandstones with hematite-coated quartz grains). A second major peak, which raised atmospheric oxygen levels to 50 percent PAL, was reached by 600 million years ago. It was denoted by the first appearance of animal life (metazoans) requiring sufficient oxygen for the production of collagen and the subsequent formation of skeletons. Furthermore, in the stratosphere during the Precambrian, free oxygen began to form a layer of ozone (O3), which currently acts as a protective shield against the Sun’s ultraviolet rays.

Development of the ocean
	The origin of Earth’s oceans occurred earlier than that of the oldest sedimentary rocks. The 3.85-billion-year-old sediments at Isua in western Greenland contain BIFs that were deposited in water. These sediments, which include abraded detrital zircon grains that indicate water transport, are interbedded with basaltic lavas with pillow structures that form when lavas are extruded under water. The stability of liquid water (that is, its continuous presence on Earth) implies that surface seawater temperatures were similar to those of the present.
	Differences in the chemical composition of Archean and Proterozoic sedimentary rocks point to two different mechanisms for controlling seawater composition between the two Precambrian eons. During the Archean, seawater composition was primarily influenced by the pumping of water through basaltic oceanic crust, such as occurs today at oceanic spreading centres. In contrast, during the Proterozoic, the controlling factor was river discharge off stable continental margins, which first developed after 2.5 billion years ago. The present-day oceans maintain their salinity levels by a balance between salts delivered by freshwater runoff from the continents and the deposition of minerals from seawater.

Climatic conditions
	A major factor controlling the climate during the Precambrian was the tectonic arrangement of continents. At times of supercontinent formation (at 2.5 billion, 2.1 to 1.8 billion, and 1.0 billion to 900 million years ago), the total number of volcanoes was limited; there were few island arcs (long, curved island chains associated with intense volcanic and seismic activity), and the overall length of oceanic spreading ridges was relatively short. This relative shortage of volcanoes resulted in low emissions of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2). This contributed to low surface temperatures and extensive glaciations. In contrast, at times of continental breakup, which led to maximum rates of seafloor spreading and subduction (at 2.3 to 1.8 billion, 1.7 to 1.2 billion, and 800 to 500 million years ago), there were high emissions of CO2 from numerous volcanoes in oceanic ridges and island arcs. The atmospheric greenhouse effect was enhanced, warming Earth’s surface, and glaciation was absent. These latter conditions also applied to the Archean Eon prior to the formation of continents.

Temperature and rainfall
	The discovery of 3.85-billion-year-old marine sediments and pillow lavas in Greenland indicates the existence of liquid water and implies a surface temperature above 0 °C (32 °F) during the early part of Precambrian time. The presence of 3.5-billion-year-old stromatolites in Australia suggests a surface temperature of about 7 °C (45 °F). Extreme greenhouse conditions in the Archean caused by elevated atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide from intense volcanism (effusion of lava from submarine fissures) kept surface temperatures high enough for the evolution of life. They counteracted the reduced solar luminosity (rate of total energy output from the Sun), which ranged from 70 to 80 percent of the present value. Without these extreme greenhouse conditions, liquid water would not have occurred on Earth’s surface.
	In contrast, direct evidence of rainfall in the geological record is very difficult to find. Some limited evidence has been provided by well-preserved rain pits in 1.8-billion-year-old rocks in southwestern Greenland.

life
	Precambrian rocks were originally defined to predate the Cambrian Period and therefore all life, although the term Proterozoic was later coined from the Greek for “early life.” It is now known that Precambrian rocks contain evidence of the very beginnings of life on Earth—which, based on the age of the rocks that contain the oldest evidence of life, took place nearly 3.5 billion years ago—the explosion of life-forms without skeletons before the Cambrian, and even the development of sexual reproduction.	
	The earliest signs of life on Earth are in western Greenland where apatite (calcium phosphate) grains within a 3.85-billion-year-old meta-sedimentary rock have carbon isotope ratios that indicate an organic origin. The presence of organic hydrocarbon droplets in kerogenous sediments has been found in the 3.46-billion-year-old Warrawoona Group in the Pilbara craton of Western Australia. These are small amounts of oil that date to the Archean Eon (which lasted from about 4.6 billion to 2.5 billion years ago).
	The first fossil evidence of terrestrial life is found in the early Archean sedimentary rocks of the greenstone-granite belts (metamorphosed oceanic crust and island arc complexes) of the Barberton craton in South Africa and in the Warrawoona Group, which are both roughly 3.5 billion years old. There are two types of these early, simple, biological structures: microfossils and stromatolites (sheetlike mats precipitated by communities of microorganisms).

Microfossils and stromatolites
	The microfossils occur in cherts and shales and are of two varieties. One type consists of spherical carbonaceous aggregates, or spheroids, which may measure as much as 20 mm (0.8 inch) in diameter. These resemble algae and cysts of flagellates and are widely regarded as biogenic (produced by living organisms). The other variety of microfossils is made up of carbonaceous filamentous threads, which are curving hollow tubes up to 150 micrometres (0.006 inch) long. Most likely, these tubes are the fossil remains of filamentous organisms. Hundreds of them have been found in some rock layers. The oldest microfossils, and possibly the oldest known evidence of life on Earth, comes from the Apex chert deposit in Western Australia. The chert dates to 3.47 billion years ago and holds at least five species of microfossils. Some of these species were early photosynthesizers, whereas others had metabolic processes that relied on methane cycling. Such diversity suggests that the first forms of life were much older than the chert in which they were discovered, possibly as old as 4 billion years. A much younger, but no less fascinating, collection of microfossils occurred in the 2.8-billion-year-old gold reefs (conglomerate beds with rich gold deposits) of the Witwatersrand Basin in South Africa. These beds are notable because they contain carbonaceous columnar microfossils up to 7 mm (slightly less than 0.3 inch) long that resemble modern algae, fungi, and lichens. They probably extracted gold from their environment in much the same way that modern fungi and lichens do.
	Stromatolites are stratiform, domal, or columnar structures made from sheetlike mats precipitated by communities of microorganisms, particularly filamentous blue-green algae. The early Archean examples form domes as tall as about 10 cm (4 inches). Stromatolites occur in many of the world’s greenstone-granite belts. In the 2.7-billion-year-old Steep Rock Lake belt in Ontario, Canada, they reach 3 metres (9 feet) in height and diameter. Stromatolites continued to form all the way through the geologic record and today grow in warm intertidal waters, as exemplified by those of Shark Bay in Western Australia. They provide indisputable evidence that life had begun on Earth using algal photosynthesis in complex, integrated biological communities by 3.5 billion years ago.
	These Archean organisms were prokaryotes that were incapable of cell division. They were relatively resistant to ultraviolet radiation and thus were able to survive during Earth’s early history when the atmosphere lacked an ozone layer. The prokaryotes were predominant until about 1.7 billion to 1.9 billion years ago, when they were overtaken by the eukaryotes (organisms possessing nucleated cells). The latter made use of oxygen in metabolism and for growth and thus developed profusely in the increasingly oxygen-rich atmosphere of the early Proterozoic (the Proterozoic Eon extended from 2.5 billion to 541 million years ago). The eukaryotes were capable of cell division, which allowed DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), the genetic coding material, to be passed on to succeeding generations.
	By early Proterozoic time both microfossils and stromatolites had proliferated. The best-known occurrence of microorganisms is in the 2-billion-year-old stromatolite-bearing Gunflint iron formation in the Huronian Basin of southern Ontario. These microbial fossils include some 30 different types with spheroidal, filamentous, and sporelike forms up to about 20 micrometres (0.0008 inch) across. Sixteen species in 14 genera have been classified so far. Microfossils of this kind are abundant, contain beautifully preserved organic matter, and are extremely similar to such present-day microorganisms as blue-green algae and microbacteria. There are comparable microfossils from the early Proterozoic in Minnesota and Michigan in the United States, the Belcher Islands in Hudson Bay in Canada, southern Greenland, Western Australia, and northern China. These microbiota lived at the time of the transition in the chemical composition of the atmosphere when oxygen began accumulating for the first time.
	During the late Proterozoic, stromatolites reached their peak of development, became distributed worldwide, and diversified into complex, branching forms. From about 700 million years ago, however, they began to decline significantly in number. Possibly the newly arrived metazoans (multicelled organisms whose cells are differentiated into tissues and organs) ate the stromatolitic algae, and their profuse growth destroyed the habitats of the latter.
	There is the intriguing question as to when sexual division arose in life-forms. In the late 1960s, American paleobiologist J. William Schopf pointed out that the abundant microflora of the 900-million-year-old Bitter Springs Formation of central Australia includes some eukaryotic algae that have cells in various stages of division arranged into tetrahedral sporelike forms. These resemble the tetrad of spore cells of living plants known to develop by sexual division. In effect, by the end of the Precambrian the conditions were set for the explosion of life at the start of the Phanerozoic Eon (which extends from about 541 million years ago to the present).

The End of Precambrian Era
	The boundary between the Ediacaran Period of the Proterozoic Era and the Cambrian Period of the Paleozoic Era is not as clear-cut as it was once thought to be. It used to be thought that increasing oxygenation caused a mass extinction of Ediacaran forms and a geologically sudden proliferation of new complex forms. Now it is understood that there were many complex multicellular animals capable of living in the higher oxygen of the Ediacaran environment. However they were nearly all soft-bodied forms, which left few fossil traces behind for us to find. The relative abundance of Cambrian fossils represents an increase in animals with calcified body parts, which were easily fossilized, not a mass extinction of Ediacaran life as was once thought.

Significant geologic events
Distinctive features
	The Archean and Proterozoic eons within Precambrian time are very different and must be considered separately. The Archean-Proterozoic boundary constitutes a major turning point in Earth history. Before that time the crust of the Earth was in the process of growing, and so there were no large, stable continents. Afterward, when such continents had emerged, orogenic belts were able to form on the margins of and between continental blocks.
	There are two types of Archean orogenic belts. The first occurs in upper crustal greenstone-granite belts rich in volcanic rocks that are probably primitive types of oceanic crust and island arcs (long, curved island chains associated with intense volcanic and seismic activity) that formed during the early rapid stage of crustal growth. The second occurs in granulite-gneiss belts that were recrystallized in the Archean mid-lower crust under metamorphic conditions associated with high-temperature granulite and amphibolite facies. Thus, granulites, which typically contain the high-temperature mineral hypersthene (a type of pyroxene), are a characteristic feature of many Precambrian orogenic belts that have been deeply eroded. In Phanerozoic orogenic belts, granulites are rare.
	There are several other rock types that developed primarily during the Precambrian but rarely later. This restriction is a result of the unique conditions that prevailed during Precambrian time. For example, banded-iron formations are ferruginous sediments that were deposited on the margins of early, iron-rich oceans. Anorthosite, which consists largely of plagioclase, forms large bodies in several Proterozoic belts. Komatiite, a magnesium-rich, high-temperature volcanic rock derived from very hot mantle (part of the Earth between the crust and the core), was extruded in abundance during the early Precambrian when the heat flow of the Earth was higher than it is today. Blueschist, which contains the blue mineral glaucophane, forms in subduction zones under high pressures and low temperatures, and its rare occurrence in Precambrian rocks may indicate that temperatures in early subduction zones were too high for its formation.
	The bulk of many of the world’s valuable mineral deposits (for example, those of gold, nickel, chromite, copper, and iron) also formed during the Precambrian. These concentrations are a reflection of distinctive Precambrian sedimentary and magmatic rocks and their environments of formation.