Carboniferous Period
	Carboniferous Period, fifth interval of the Paleozoic Era, succeeding the Devonian Period and preceding the Permian Period. In terms of absolute time, the Carboniferous Period began approximately 358.9 million years ago and ended 298.9 million years ago. Its duration of approximately 60 million years makes it the longest period of the Paleozoic Era and the second longest period of the Phanerozoic Eon. The rocks that were formed or deposited during the period constitute the Carboniferous System. The name Carboniferous refers to coal-bearing strata that characterize the upper portion of the series throughout the world.
	The Carboniferous Period is formally divided into two major subdivisions—the Mississippian (358.9 to 323.2 million years ago) and the Pennsylvanian (323.2 to 298.9 million years ago) subperiods—their rocks recognized chronostratigraphically as subsystems by international agreement. In Europe, the Carboniferous Period is subdivided into the Dinantian and succeeding Silesian subsystems, but the boundary between those divisions is below the internationally accepted Mississippian-Pennsylvanian boundary.


Paleogeography
	The Early Carboniferous (Mississippian) world is characterized by Laurussia, a series of small cratonic blocks that occupied the Northern Hemisphere, and Gondwana, an enormous landmass made up of present-day South America, Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and the Indian subcontinent in the Southern Hemisphere. Lithospheric plate movement brought the continents close together on one side of the globe. The orogenies (mountain-building events) taking place during the Devonian Period had formed the “Old Red Sandstone” continent. The principal landmass of Laurussia was made up of present-day North America, western Europe through the Urals, and Balto-Scandinavia. Much of Laurussia lay near the paleoequator, whereas the cratons of Siberia, Kazakhstania, and most of China existed as separate continents occupying positions at high latitudes. During this time, the Tethys Sea separated the southern margin of the Old Red Sandstone continent completely from Gondwana.
	By Late Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian) times, plate movements had brought most of Laurussia into contact with Gondwana and closed the Tethys. Laurussia and Gondwana became fused by the Appalachian-Hercynian orogeny (mountain-building event), which continued into the Permian Period. The position of the landmass that would become the eastern United States and northern Europe remained equatorial, while the China and Siberia cratons continued to reside at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere.
	The distribution of land and sea followed fairly predictable limits. The continental interiors were terrestrial, and no major marine embayments apparently existed. Upland areas of the continental interiors underwent substantial erosion during the Carboniferous. Shallow seas occupied the continental shelf margins surrounding the continents. Fringe areas of Carboniferous continents may very well have become the continental interiors of the present day. Deeper troughs (geosynclines) lay seaward of the continental masses, and their sedimentary record is now characterized by mountains.

Paleoclimate
	During the Carboniferous Period, the climate of various landmasses was controlled by their latitudinal position. Since prevailing wind patterns were similar to those on Earth today, tropical conditions characterized the equatorial regions; the midlatitudes were dry, and higher latitudes were both cooler and moist. Although both western Europe and Balto-Scandinavia resided in latitudes low enough to produce evaporite (minerals in sedimentary rock deposits of soluble salts resulting from the evaporation of water) deposits in shallow continental settings, only North America occupied an equatorial setting during the Mississippian. Wetter areas on other continental blocks in higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere began to form coal swamps during this time.
	In contrast, the bulk of Gondwana was below 30° South latitude and experienced colder conditions that allowed the formation of continental glaciers. These glaciations were similar to those occurring in the Northern Hemisphere during the Pleistocene Epoch. Coeval (parallel) continental glaciations did not occur in the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, probably because the landmasses were too small to sustain large ice fields.
	Paleogeography continued to control climates into Pennsylvanian times. As sea-level cyclicity became more pronounced, the equatorial settings changed from carbonate shelves to coal basins. Continental glaciation expanded in Gondwana, allowing glaciers to extend into lower latitudes that otherwise might have formed coal swamps. As mountains developed toward the close of the Pennsylvanian, rain-shadow effects became more influential, inhibiting the process of coal deposition in the basins of western Europe. Flora of the Carboniferous followed the same climatic gradients as glacial deposits. Fossil plants found in areas located in high latitudes during the Carboniferous exhibit seasonal growth rings, while those of the presumed equatorial coal swamps lack such rings, as do modern tropical trees.

Life
Invertebrates
	The Carboniferous was a time of diverse marine invertebrates. The Late Devonian Period experienced major extinctions within some marine invertebrate groups, and Carboniferous faunas reflect a different composition from what had prevailed earlier in the Paleozoic Era.
	Most notably, reef-forming organisms, such as tabulate corals and stromatoporoids (large colonial marine organisms similar to hydrozoans), were limited. Consequently, Carboniferous reefs were poorly developed because of this lack of framework builders. Benthic, or sea-bottom, marine communities were dominated by the crinoids, a group of stalked echinoderms (invertebrates characterized by a hard, spiny covering or skin) that still lives today. These animals were solitary suspension feeders that grew in such great profusion that they affected bottom currents and water circulation. The calcareous (containing calcium carbonate) remains of these organisms are significant rock-forming materials.
	A related, but extinct, group of stalked echinoderms, the blastoids, also characterize Carboniferous deposits. Areas favorable for crinoids and blastoids were occupied by other filter-feeding organisms. Colonies of stenolaemate bryozoans (moss animals) and articulate brachiopods (lamp shells) are common associates of the crinoids. The bryozoans attached their undersurfaces to the seafloor and formed either fanlike, twiglike, or small knobby colonies of calcium carbonate in areas characterized by low rates of sedimentation. Articulate brachiopods formed a bivalved shell of calcium carbonate that either rested free on the seafloor or was attached by a fleshy stalk. The brachiopods and bryozoans both pumped the water column and removed food and oxygen by a tentacular lophophore (a horseshoe-shaped feeding organ). Brachiopods are particularly common, and all orders except the Pentamerida are found in Carboniferous rocks. Both calcareous and agglutinate foraminifers (pseudopod-using unicellular organisms protected by a test or shell) are represented in Carboniferous deposits, particularly limestones.
	In the Pennsylvanian, an unusual group of these protozoans (single-celled eukaryotic organisms), the fusulinids (single-celled amoeba-like organisms with complex shells), appeared and dominated assemblages through the Permian Period, when they became extinct. The fusulinids secreted a tightly coiled calcareous test that was chambered, but they lived free on the seafloor.
	Some benthic organisms that were common to early and middle Paleozoic times began to decline during the Carboniferous. These included the trilobites (which became extinct at the end of the Permian), rugose corals, and sponges. The pelagic, or water column, environment was inhabited by a profusion of cephalopods. These included both straight and coiled nautiloids (early relatives of the chambered Nautilus), the ammonoids (extinct members of the same class), and the first squids. Carboniferous cephalopods were either predators or scavengers, and they swam by jet propulsion. Some of the straight nautiloids grew exceedingly large (greater than 3 metres [10 feet]). The ammonoids exhibit rapid evolutionary development through the Carboniferous and, along with the calcareous foraminifers, provide the biostratigraphic data for age dating and correlating the boundaries and various subdivisions of the period. Graptolites (small colonial planktonic animals) extend into the Carboniferous, but they became extinct during the Mississippian.
	Insects had occupied terrestrial environments since the Devonian, but they diversified during the Carboniferous Period. No winged insects are known from Devonian or Mississippian times, but wings probably evolved during the Mississippian. By the Pennsylvanian subperiod, dragonflies and mayflies were abundant and had reached large sizes, with some of the earliest ancestors of modern dragonflies (Protodonata) possessing wingspans of approximately 70 cm (28 inches). Some scientists maintain that higher oxygen concentrations present in the atmosphere during the Carboniferous Period (some 30 percent compared with just 21 percent during the early 21st century) may have played a role in enabling these insects to grow so large. In addition, fossils of more advanced insects capable of folding their wings, particularly cockroaches, are well represented in rocks of the Pennsylvanian subperiod. Other Pennsylvanian insects include the ancestral forms of grasshoppers and crickets and the first terrestrial scorpions.

Plants
	Carboniferous terrestrial environments were dominated by vascular land plants ranging from small, shrubby growths to trees exceeding heights of 100 feet (30 metres). The most important groups were the lycopods, sphenopsids, cordaites, seed ferns, and true ferns. Lysopods are represented in the modern world only by club mosses, but in the Carboniferous Period they included tall trees with dense, spirally arranged leaves. Reproduction involved either cones or spore-bearing organs on the leaves. Lepidodendron, with diamond-shaped leaf bases, and Sigillaria, with ribs and round leaf bases, were the dominant lycopod genera. They have produced fossil logs that exceed 1 metre (3.3 feet) at their bases. Sphenopsids are trees and shrubs with a distinctly jointed stem and leaves arranged in spirals from those joints. The horsetail rush (Equisetum) is the only living representative, but Carboniferous floras contained several members of the group. Calamitesis was the most common Carboniferous genus. Although small in comparison with lycopods, Calamitesis grew in profusion in drier, more upland environments.
	Cordaites are extinct members of the gymnosperms (nonflowering vascular plants), and they were the precursors to the conifers. They also favoured upland environments, where they grew tall and possessed tiny scalelike leaves and cones similar to modern conifers. Walchia is a typical genus that probably grew in forested areas in stands similar to where modern pines would grow.
	Seed ferns, or pteridosperms, are gymnosperms with fernlike foliage, but they reproduce by using seeds rather than spores. They have no living representatives. This group includes trees, such as the Permian genus Glossopteris, but they are represented in Carboniferous floras by taxa such as Neuropteris and Pecopteris, both of which were low scrubs. Both seed ferns and true ferns formed the underfoliage associated with most Carboniferous coal swamps.

Fishes
	The diversity of fish from the Devonian continued into the Carboniferous in both marine and freshwater environments. The arthrodires (armoured, jawed fish) became extinct almost immediately in the Mississippian, while both the chondrichthians (cartilage skeleton) and osteichthians (bony skeleton) are represented throughout the Carboniferous. The common Carboniferous shark, Cladoselache, dominated marine settings, which also included the bradyodonts (a group of shell-crushing, pavement-toothed cartilaginous fish). A freshwater shark, Orthacanthus, is also known from Pennsylvanian freshwater deposits in both Europe and North America. Osteichthians also occupied freshwater environments. These included the crossopterygians (lobe-finned fishes), dipnoi (lungfishes), and palaeoniscoids (small ray-finned fishes). In the Devonian, the crossopterygians and dipnoi were the dominant forms, but the palaeoniscoids dominated the Carboniferous assemblages. All these groups have living relatives.

Amphibians and early reptiles
	The Carboniferous Period was the time of peak amphibian development and the emergence of the reptiles. Among the amphibians, the labyrinthodonts are represented by members of order Embolomeri, such as Calligenethlon, Carbonerpeton, and Diplovertebron, and members of family Eryopoidae, such as Eryops, Arkserpeton, and Amphibamus. These forms had large skulls, small trunks, and stocky limbs. They were derived from the crossopterygians that emerged in the Devonian from freshwater settings. Embolomerians and Eryopodaens probably remained close to water, favouring the abundant coal swamps of the time. None of these forms have living representatives.
	Another group of unusual forms, the lepospondylians, resembled amphibians but are not included within the class in most recent classifications. This group contained a great variety of semiaquatic forms such as the snakelike Ophiderpeton, the “horned” Keraterpeton, and the microsaurs, such as Asaphestera. The lepospondylians became extinct during the Pennsylvanian subperiod.
	The development of the reptiles was characterized by the improvement of terrestrial reproductive systems during the Carboniferous, a feature not preservable in the record as such. The fossil record of early reptiles is poor, particularly in comparison with that of Permian and Mesozoic times. The earliest reptiles, the captorhinid Hylonomus, were recovered from Lower Pennsylvanian lycopod tree stumps in Nova Scotia. These small animals, which measure less than 0.3 metre (1 foot), were preserved after becoming entrapped in the cavities left by rotting trees.

Distinctive features
	The Carboniferous Period was a time of highly variable depositional settings, characterized by both shallow marine and continental environments. In the Northern Hemisphere, the Lower Carboniferous (Mississippian time) is typified by shallow-water limestones, while the Upper Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian time) possesses cyclical sedimentary deposits that reflect an alternation of marine and nonmarine conditions and a frequent occurrence of coal swamps. In contrast, the Southern Hemisphere experienced widespread continental glaciations during much of these same intervals.

Significant geologic events
	The Carboniferous was a time of relative continental stability. Continental margins, and some continental interiors, such as that of North America, were covered by shallow, epicontinental seas that resulted in the development of the most extensive carbonates since those occurring in the lower latitudes of the Ordovician Period. No mountain building is associated with the Mississippian, but the isostasy following the orogenies that closed the Devonian Period certainly affected the continental blocks of Laurussia (a series of small cratonic blocks that occupied the Northern Hemisphere) and Gondwana (an enormous landmass made up of present-day South America, Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and the Indian subcontinent).
	Widespread continental ice sheets had developed in Gondwana to the point that their expansion and contraction began to drive the rise and fall of sea level, producing cyclic depositions that characterize the later part of the Carboniferous. A major drop in sea level produced the unconformity (an interruption in the deposition of sedimentary rock) at the Mississippian-Pennsylvanian boundary and an associated global extinction event, particularly among the crinoids and ammonoid cephalopods. The Pennsylvanian record reflects the continued Gondwanan glaciations, which produced the extensive coal cyclothems (repeated sequences of distinctive sedimentary rock layers) throughout the Northern Hemisphere. These cyclothems produced the most extensive coal deposits in the entire geologic record. The Pennsylvanian concludes with the Ouachita-Alleghenian-Herycnian orogeny, which developed mountains through the collision of the major landmasses of Laurussia and Gondwana.
	The movement of Gondwana toward the paleoequator closed the remaining salient of the Tethys Sea and formed the Ouachita Mountains (Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas), southern Appalachians (southeastern United States), Hercynide Mountains (southern Europe), and Mauritanide Mountains (northern Africa). These events continued the creation of a supercontinent, Pangea, that would finally end in the Permian Period.
	Less-significant orogenic events occurred in the Cordilleran region of present-day North and South America with a pulse of the Antler orogeny that elevated the ancestral Rocky Mountains, precordilleran movements in western South America, and similar tectonism in northern Asia (as in the Tien Shan and Kunlun ranges), Australia, and New Zealand. The ancestral Ural Mountains also date from this time.